Added profiling docs for Polaris and Aurora (#576)
argonne-lcf/user-guides: docs/polaris/data-science/profiling_dl.md

# Profiling Deep Learning Applications

> We can use both framework (for example, PyTorch) native profiler and vendor specific 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use both a framework-specific (for example, PyTorch-specific) native profiler and the vendor-specific NVIDIA
```

[Nsys profiler](https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/get-started) to get
high level profiling information and timeline of execution for an application.
For kernel level information, we may use 
[Nsight compute profiler](https://developer.nvidia.com/tools-overview/nsight-compute/get-started).
Refer to the respective documentation for more details:

> [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)

Reviewer: use unordered list `-`

Author: Done, doing a push in a few minutes!

[Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/)

[Nsight Compute CLI](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html)

[PyTorch Profiler](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/profiler_recipe.html)

## Example Usage

At the high level, the usage of the `nsys` or the `ncu` profiler can be
summarized through the following command:

```
nsys profile -o profile python application.py
```
If we want to launch with `MPI` then

```
mpiexec ... nsys profile ... python application.py ... 
```
These two commands show the basic command-line structure of deploying the 
profilers. Below we discuss important use cases that are relevant in 
large scale distributed profiling.

We can use `nsys` to trace an application running on multiple ranks and 
multiple nodes. A simple example, where we use a wrapper script to trace the 
rank 0 on each node of a 2 node job running a PyTorch application is below:

> ### An `nsys` wrapper

Reviewer: same comment as before re: code block title

Author: Done, doing a push in a few minutes!

```
#!/bin/bash
## This wrapper should be used with nsys profiler to trace in any number of nodes
## The script is set up to trace rank 0 of first 2 Nodes in the case of
## profiling a job running on larger than 2 nodes.
FNAME_EXT=$(basename "$2")
FNAME="${FNAME_EXT%%.*}"

NNODES=`wc -l < $PBS_NODEFILE`

WORK_DIR=/path/to/the/Python/application
DTAG=$(date +%F_%H%M%S)
PROFILER_OUTDIR=${WORK_DIR}/profiles/choice_of_name_nsys_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}/${FNAME}_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}
RUN_ID=choice_of_name_nsys_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}

mkdir -p ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}
NSYS_OPTS=" -o ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}/${RUN_ID}_%q{PMI_RANK} --stats=true --show-output=true "

PROFRANK=0
RANKCUTOFF=8

if [[ $PALS_LOCAL_RANKID -eq $PROFRANK ]] && [[ $PMI_RANK -lt $RANKCUTOFF ]]; then
  echo "On rank ${PMI_RANK}, collecting traces "
  nsys profile $NSYS_OPTS "$@"
else
  "$@"
fi
```
There are a few important things to notice in the wrapper.

- `NSYS_OPTS`: These are the options that `nsys` uses to trace data at
different levels. An exhaustive list of options can be found in the 
[nsys user guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html).
Note that, `%q{PMI_RANK}` is essential to get a per rank profile.

> 

Reviewer: delete extra newline

Author: Done! Missed in the earlier pushes, now complete

- `PROFRANK`: As implemented, this variable is set by the user to trace the rank
of choice. For example, this wrapper will trace the rank 0 on each node.

- `RANKCUTOFF`: This variable is Polaris specific. As we can run as many as 4
ranks per node (without using MPS), the first 2 nodes of a job will have 8
ranks running. This provides the upper cutoff of the label (in number) of ranks,
beyond which `nsys` will not trace any rank. An user can change the number
according to the number of maximum ranks running per node to set up how many
ranks to be
traced. `nsys` will produce a profile (`nsys-rep` file, by default) per traced
rank.

To view the produced trace files, we need to use NVIDIA's Nsight Systems on the 
local machine

[Getting Started, Download Nsys](https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/get-started)

#### Deployment

> The wrapper above can be deployed using a PBS job script the following way

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wrapper above can be deployed using the following PBS job script:
```

```
#!/bin/bash -l
#PBS -l select=2:system=polaris
#PBS -l place=scatter
#PBS -l walltime=0:05:00
#PBS -q debug-scaling
#PBS -l filesystems=home:eagle
#PBS -A YOUR ALLOCATION

> # What's the benchmark work directory?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# What's the working directory for the benchmark?
```

WORK_DIR=/path/to/the/Python/program
TEMPORARY_DIR=/path/to/a/temporary/directory/for/`nsys`/to/use
NSYS_WRAPPER=${WORK_DIR}/nsys_wrapper.sh

# MPI and OpenMP settings
NNODES=`wc -l < $PBS_NODEFILE`
NRANKS_PER_NODE=4

let NRANKS=${NNODES}*${NRANKS_PER_NODE}

module use /soft/modulefiles/
module load conda/2024-04-29
conda activate

mpiexec -n ${NRANKS} -ppn ${NRANKS_PER_NODE} --env TMPDIR=${TEMPORARY_DIR} -l --line-buffer \
${NSYS_WRAPPER} python ${WORK_DIR}/application.py
```

> Note that, `--env TMPDIR=${TEMPORARY_DIR}` is critical for the `nsys` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that `--env TMPDIR=${TEMPORARY_DIR}` is essential for `nsys` to function correctly.
```

> functioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### An `ncu` wrapper

Reviewer: same comment as above re: code block titles

Author: Done!

> We can get kernel level information (for example roofline, tensorcore usage)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can get kernel level information (for example roofline, Tensor Core usage)
```

using NVIDIA's Nsight Compute profiler. Below is a simple wrapper script to 
show the usage.

```
#!/bin/bash
FNAME_EXT=$(basename "$2")
FNAME="${FNAME_EXT%%.*}"

NNODES=`wc -l < $PBS_NODEFILE`

WORK_DIR=/path/to/the/Python/program
DTAG=$(date +%F_%H%M%S)
PROFILER_OUTDIR=${WORK_DIR}/profiles/choice_of_name_ncu_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}/${FNAME}_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}
RUN_ID=choice_of_name_ncu_n${NNODES}_${DTAG}

mkdir -p ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}
#KERNEL_NAME=ampere_sgemm_128x128_tn
KERNEL_NAME=ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x256_ldg8_f2f_stages_64x3_tn
#NCU_OPTS_DETAILED=" --set detailed -k ${KERNEL_NAME} -o ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}/${RUN_ID}_%q{PMI_RANK} "
NCU_OPTS_ROOFLINE=" --set roofline -k ${KERNEL_NAME} -o ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}/${RUN_ID}_%q{PMI_RANK} "
#NCU_OPTS_FULL=" --set full -k ${KERNEL_NAME} -o ${PROFILER_OUTDIR}/${RUN_ID}_%q{PMI_RANK} "

PROFRANK=0
RANKCUTOFF=8

if [[ $PALS_LOCAL_RANKID -eq $PROFRANK ]] && [[ $PMI_RANK -lt $RANKCUTOFF ]]; then
  echo "On rank ${PMI_RANK}, collecting traces "
  ncu $NCU_OPTS_DETAILED "$@"
else
  "$@"
fi
```

This wrapper can be deployed as the `nsys` example above. In the `ncu` wrapper
we explicitly set the name of the kernel that we want to analyze 

> (a gemm kernel in this case).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(a GEMM kernel in this case).
```
or 
```suggestion
(a `gemm` kernel in this case).
```

The exhaustive list of option to set the amount
of data collection can be found in the 
[command line section](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html#command-line-options)
of the documentation. Here we only show standard options, either of the three 
could be chosen. Note that, invoking each option will lead to varying amounts 
of time the profiler need to run. This will be important in setting the 

> requested wall-time for your batch job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requested walltime for your batch job.
```

`ncu` will generate `ncu-rep` files for each traced ranks, and we will need 
NVIDIA's Nsight Compute system on the local machine.

[Download Nsight Compute](https://developer.nvidia.com/tools-overview/nsight-compute/get-started)

The next step is to load the `nsys-rep` files in the Nsight Systems GUI, and
the `ncu-rep` files to the Nsight Compute GUI.

> ### For a single rank run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Single rank run
```

important tab is the `Details` tab. We find that at the 3rd row from the top.
Under that tab we have the `GPU Speed of Light Throughput` section. In this
section we can find plots showing GPU compute and memory usage. On the right
hand side of the tab, there is a menu bar which gives us the option to select
which plot to display, either the roofline plot or the compute-memory
throughput chart.

### For a multi-rank run

#### `nsys` profiles
In the case, where we have traced multiple ranks, whether from a single node or
multiple nodes `nsys` GUI allow us to view the reports in a combined fashion on
a single timeline (same time-axis for both reports). This is done through the
"multi-report view", `file` --> `New multi-report view` or `file` --> `Open`
and selecting however many reports we would like to see in a combined timeline,
`nsys` prompts the user to allow for a "multi-report view". These can also be
viewed separately.

### Profiler Options
In both cases, `nsys` and `ncu` we have used the standard option sets to
generate the profiles. The exhaustive list could be found in the respective
documentation pages:

> [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)

Reviewer: Use unordered list to clean up the formatting

# Profiling Deep Learning Applications

We can use both a framework-specific (for example, PyTorch-specific) native profiler and the vendor-specific NVIDIA
[Nsys profiler](https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/get-started) to get
high level profiling information and timeline of execution for an application.
For kernel level information, we may use 
[Nsight compute profiler](https://developer.nvidia.com/tools-overview/nsight-compute/get-started).
Refer to the respective documentation for more details:

> 
> - [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)
> 
> - [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/)
> 
> - [Nsight Compute CLI](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html)
> 
> - [PyTorch Profiler](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/profiler_recipe.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)
- [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/)
- [Nsight Compute CLI](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html)
- [PyTorch Profiler](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/profiler_recipe.html)
```

## Example Usage

> At the high level, the usage of the `nsys` or the `ncu` profiler can be
> summarized through the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both the `nsys` and `ncu` profiler commands take the following generic structure:
```

```
nsys profile -o profile python application.py
```

> If we want to launch with `MPI` then
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to launch the profiled application with MPI, then `mpiexec` must be used:
```

```
mpiexec ... nsys profile ... python application.py ... 
```
These two commands show the basic command-line structure of deploying the 
profilers. Below we discuss important use cases that are relevant in 
large scale distributed profiling.

We can use `nsys` to trace an application running on multiple ranks and 
multiple nodes. A simple example, where we use a wrapper script to trace the 
rank 0 on each node of a 2 node job running a PyTorch application is below:

> We can use `nsys` to trace an application running on multiple ranks and

Reviewer: duplicate?

Reviewer: previous paragraph says 2 nodes, this one says 4 nodes

Author: Yes! Fixed now!

different levels. An exhaustive list of options can be found in the 
[nsys user guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html).
Note that, `%q{PMI_RANK}` is essential to get a per rank profile.

- `PROFRANK`: As implemented, this variable is set by the user to trace the rank
of choice. For example, this wrapper will trace the rank 0 on each node.

- `RANKCUTOFF`: This variable is Polaris specific. As we can run as many as 4
ranks per node (without using MPS), the first 2 nodes of a job will have 8
ranks running. This provides the upper cutoff of the label (in number) of ranks,
beyond which `nsys` will not trace any rank. An user can change the number
according to the number of maximum ranks running per node to set up how many
ranks to be
traced. `nsys` will produce a profile (`nsys-rep` file, by default) per traced
rank.

To view the produced trace files, we need to use NVIDIA's Nsight Systems on the 
local machine

[Getting Started, Download Nsys](https://developer.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/get-started)

#### Deployment

The wrapper above can be deployed using the following PBS job script:

> ```bash title="pbs_jobscript_nsys.sh"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash linenums="1" title="pbs_jobscript_nsys.sh"
```

#!/bin/bash -l
#PBS -l select=2:system=polaris
#PBS -l place=scatter
#PBS -l walltime=0:05:00
#PBS -q debug-scaling
#PBS -l filesystems=home:eagle
#PBS -A YOUR ALLOCATION

# What's the working directory for the benchmark?
WORK_DIR=/path/to/the/Python/program
TEMPORARY_DIR=/path/to/a/temporary/directory/for/`nsys`/to/use
NSYS_WRAPPER=${WORK_DIR}/nsys_wrapper.sh

# MPI and OpenMP settings
NNODES=`wc -l < $PBS_NODEFILE`
NRANKS_PER_NODE=4

let NRANKS=${NNODES}*${NRANKS_PER_NODE}

module use /soft/modulefiles/
module load conda/2024-04-29
conda activate

mpiexec -n ${NRANKS} -ppn ${NRANKS_PER_NODE} --env TMPDIR=${TEMPORARY_DIR} -l --line-buffer \
${NSYS_WRAPPER} python ${WORK_DIR}/application.py
```

Note that `--env TMPDIR=${TEMPORARY_DIR}` is essential for `nsys` to function correctly.

We can get kernel level information (for example roofline, Tensor Core usage)
using NVIDIA's Nsight Compute profiler. Below is a simple wrapper script to 
show the usage.

> ```bash title="ncu_wrapper.sh"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash linenums="1" title="ncu_wrapper.sh"
```

important tab is the `Details` tab. We find that at the 3rd row from the top.
Under that tab we have the `GPU Speed of Light Throughput` section. In this
section we can find plots showing GPU compute and memory usage. On the right
hand side of the tab, there is a menu bar which gives us the option to select
which plot to display, either the roofline plot or the compute-memory
throughput chart.

### For a multi-rank run

#### `nsys` profiles
In the case, where we have traced multiple ranks, whether from a single node or
multiple nodes `nsys` GUI allow us to view the reports in a combined fashion on
a single timeline (same time-axis for both reports). This is done through the
"multi-report view", `file` --> `New multi-report view` or `file` --> `Open`
and selecting however many reports we would like to see in a combined timeline,
`nsys` prompts the user to allow for a "multi-report view". These can also be
viewed separately.

### Profiler Options
In both cases, `nsys` and `ncu` we have used the standard option sets to
generate the profiles. The exhaustive list could be found in the respective
documentation pages:

> 
> - [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)
> 
> - [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/)
> 
> - [Nsight Compute CLI](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Nsight System User Guide](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-systems/UserGuide/index.html)
- [Nsight Compute Documentation](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/)
- [Nsight Compute CLI](https://docs.nvidia.com/nsight-compute/NsightComputeCli/index.html)
```

There are many other information provided through these reports. Here we have
discussed the way to view the high level information.

### PyTorch Profiler

Using the PyTorch profiler requires changes in the application source code. A
simple example is the following:

> ```py title="pytorch_profiler_example.py"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python linenums="1" title="pytorch_profiler_example.py"
```
